---
layout: post
title: "3. Debugging Smart Contracts for Functional Correctness"
subtitle: "Fixing Smart Contracts with SmartACE"
date: 2020-05-19 21:00:00
categories: [smartace, verification, model checking]
---

# 3. Debugging Smart Contracts for Functional Correctness

Solidity makes it easy to instrument pre- and post-conditions with `require` and
`assert` statements. As shown in the [previous tutorial](2_getting_started.md),
its also reasonable to instrument checks for representation invariants. However,
for complex properties, it is often easier to instrument the model directly.

In this tutorial we will see how SmartACE models map-free smart contracts, and
then learn how to instrument and debug requirements on these models.

This tutorial requires [Seahorn and clang-format](1_installation.md).

## Invariants Across Multiple Contracts

The following Solidity program gives a `Fund` contract which can `open()` and
`close()`. While open, users can `deposit()` either into the fund. The `Manager`
smart contract constructs a fund for which it is the owner. The fund should open
once `openFund()` is called on `Manager`.

```solidity
contract Fund {
    bool isOpen;
    address owner;

    constructor() public { owner = msg.sender; }

    function claim() public {
        owner = msg.sender;
    }

    function open() public {
        require(msg.sender == owner);
        isOpen = true;
    }

    function close() public {
        require(msg.sender == owner);
        isOpen = false;
    }

    function deposit() public payable { require(isOpen); }
}

contract Manager {
    Fund fund;

    constructor() public { fund = new Fund(); }

    function openFund() public { fund.open(); }
}
```

We want to verify that until `openFund()` is called, the `balance` of `fund`
never changes. We will see that this is not the case, as any client can
`claim()` ownership of `fund` from `Manager`. Unfortunately, ownership exploits
in real smart contracts are often more subtle, and model checking is one way to
detect these bugs.

## Instrumenting the Model

Start by saving the program as `fund.sol` and then run:

```
path/to/solc fund.sol --bundle=Manager --c-model --output-dir=fund
```

Let's take a look at the artifacts generated by the tool. You should see:

  * `CMakeLists.txt`: generates make targets for fuzzing, symbolic execution,
    simulation, and model checking.
  * `cmodel.c`: provides the model we are verifying.
  * `harness.c`: provides the entry-point (`main`) to the model.
  * `primitives.h`: header-only library which defines C primitives for Solidity
    primitive types.
  * `libverify/`: runtime libraries which define how require, assert, etc., are
    handled in each model.

To instrument the model, we will need to modify `cmodel.c`. The code is not
human-readable but we can fix this with `clang-format`:

  * `mdkir build ; cd build`
  * `cmake .. -DSEA_PATH=/path/to/seahorn/bin`
  * `make run-clang-format`

Now open `cmodel.c`. At the top we can see how each contract is encoded:

```cpp
struct Fund {
    sol_address_t model_address;
    sol_uint256_t model_balance;
    sol_bool_t user_isOpen;
    sol_address_t user_owner;
};
struct Manager {
    sol_address_t model_address;
    sol_uint256_t model_balance;
    struct Fund user_fund;
};
```

Members prefixed by `user_` are taken from the smart contract definition while
methods prefixed `model_` are generated by SmartACE. As we can see here, all
primitive Solidity types are wrapped by singleton structures. To get the balance
of `Fund` we must access `model_balance.v`.

Now navigate to `void run_model(void)`. This method is the entry-point to our
model. After some bootstrapping, we can see `Manager` initialized:

```cpp
smartace_log("[Initializing contract_0]");
((sender).v) = (rt_nd_range(3, 5, "sender"));
((value).v) = (0);
((blocknum_tmp).v) = (nd_uint256_t("blocknum"));
sol_require(((blocknum).v) <= ((blocknum_tmp).v), 0);
(blocknum) = (blocknum_tmp);
((timestamp_tmp).v) = (nd_uint256_t("timestamp"));
sol_require(((timestamp).v) <= ((timestamp_tmp).v), 0);
(timestamp) = (timestamp_tmp);
Init_Manager(&(contract_0), sender, value, blocknum, timestamp, paid, origin);
```

(*SW: `rt_` is an old acronym that made sense at the time. I think we should find something new. Perhaps just `nd_range` and `nd_byte`*).

Each method prefixed by `nd_` is used to generate a non-deterministic value. In
this code we construct `Manager` using a non-deterministic `msg.sender`,
`msg.value`, `block.number`, and `block.timestamp`. Therefore, the balance of
`fund` is `contract_0.user_fund.user_balances`.

This sets up an arbitrary instance of `Manager` using non-deterministic inputs.
In particular, we model `msg.sender`, `msg.value`, an increasing `block.number`,
and an increasing `block.timestamp`. The astute may notice that we only select
from addresses 3 and 4, inclusively. We will show in a later post why this is
sufficient for soundness.

Moving on, we enter a loop which simulates a sequence of transitions:

```cpp
smartace_log("[Entering transaction loop]");
while (sol_continue()) {
    sol_on_transaction();
    ((sender).v) = (rt_nd_range(3, 5, "sender"));
    ((value).v) = (0);
    ((blocknum_tmp).v) = (nd_uint256_t("blocknum"));
    sol_require(((blocknum).v) <= ((blocknum_tmp).v), 0);
    (blocknum) = (blocknum_tmp);
    ((timestamp_tmp).v) = (nd_uint256_t("timestamp"));
    sol_require(((timestamp).v) <= ((timestamp_tmp).v), 0);
    (timestamp) = (timestamp_tmp);
    uint8_t next_call = (rt_nd_range(0, 5, "next_call"));
    sol_uint256_t pre = contract_1->model_balance;
    switch (next_call) {
    case 0: {
        smartace_log("[Calling openFund on contract_0]");
        Method_Manager_FuncopenFund(&(contract_0), sender, value, blocknum, timestamp, paid, origin);
        smartace_log("[Call successful]");
        break;
    }
    /* ... */
    }
}
```

The `Seahorn` implementation of `sol_continue` always returns `true`, so the
loop runs forever. On each iteration, a method is called non-deterministically.
The method is determined by `next_call`. To instrument the contract, we must
find the case which corresponds to `Manager.openFund()`. This is easy if we
understand how SmartAce names functions:

  * A constructor is an unnamed method, which is mapped to `Init_Manager`.
  * A fallback is an unnamed method, which is mapped to `Fallback_Manager`.
  * A method, say `openFund`, is mapped to `Method_Manager_FuncopenFund`.

(*SW: This example doesn't talk about inheritance. If contract `A` extends `B` and calls `B.f` we write `Method_B_for_A_funcf`.*)

(*SW: I suggest `CONTRACT_Method(_For_OVERRIDE)_METHODNAME`, `CONTRACT_INIT`, and `CONTRACT_FALLBACK`. Modifiers will come before `_METHODNAME`.*).

We will instrument our property as a transactional post-condition. We will use
ghost variables to track when `openFund()` is called, and the balance of
`Manager.bank` before each transaction. From here, the property is straight
forward:

```cpp
smartace_log("[Entering transaction loop]");
int called = 0;
while (sol_continue()) {
    sol_on_transaction();
    sol_uint256_t pre_balance = contract_1->model_balance;
    /* ... */
    uint8_t next_call = rt_nd_range(0, 5, "next_call");
    switch (next_call) {
    case 0: {
        smartace_log("[Calling openFund on contract_0]");
        called = 1;
        Manager_Method_openFund(&(contract_0), sender, value, blocknum, timestamp, paid, origin);
        smartace_log("[Call successful]");
        break;
    }
    /* ... */
    }
    sol_uint256_t post_balance = contract_1->model_balance;
    sol_assert(called || pre_balance.v == post_balance.v, 0);
}

```

Now if we run `make verify` we will see that the property is violated.

## Debugging the Model

When `Seahorn` detects that an assertion can be violated, it can generate a
counterexample. This counterexample resolves all non-determinism with concrete
values, and terminates in an assertion failure. Thankfully, `Seahorn` provides
these counterexamples are LLVM programs. We can link it against our executable
model to produce a debuggable trace (a witness).

In practice, we could analyze this trace using a debugger such as `gdb`.
However, in this example, it is sufficient to read a trace log from the witness.
Let's reconfigure our example with logging, and then build the witness:

  * `cmake .. -DSEA_EXELOG=true`
  * `make witness`
  * `./witness`

This gives the trace:

```
[Initializing contract_0]
sender [uint8]: 3
blocknum [uint256]: 0
timestamp [uint256]: 0
[Entering transaction loop]
sender [uint8]: 3
blocknum [uint256]: 0
timestamp [uint256]: 0
next_call [uint8]: 1
[Calling claim on contract_1]
[Call successful]
sender [uint8]: 3
blocknum [uint256]: 0
timestamp [uint256]: 0
next_call [uint8]: 2
[Calling open on contract_1]
[Call successful]
sender [uint8]: 3
blocknum [uint256]: 0
timestamp [uint256]: 0
next_call [uint8]: 4
[Calling deposit on contract_1]
value [uint256]: 1
[Call successful]
[sea] __VERIFIER_error was executed
```

If we follow through this trace, we can see a single client `claim`:

  1. Acquire ownership of `fund` through `claim`.
  2. Transition `fund` to an accepting state through `open`.
  3. Move a single Ether into `fund` through `deposit`.

This is the counterexample we suspected, and it is not spurious.
